---
layout: post
title: "I can't believe I'm saying this: I'm considering buying a MacBook Pro"
date: 2016-05-13 17:00:00 -0800
comments: true
---
Just as the title says, recently I've been considering replacing my personal
laptop with a MacBook Pro, and it makes me feel dirty. People who have known me
for a long time and or who have been reading my blog for a while know that I
have been ardently opposed to Apple products for a very long time. However,
when I started working at [PatientSafe Solutions](http://www.patientsafesolutions.com/),
I was outfitted with a MacBook Pro to perform my work, mainly because our
flagship product at the organization is a specialized iPhone and corresponding
suite of apps for the hospital. This was the first time I'd had to work with a
Mac, and took a while to get used to. However, like my days with Windows, I
eventually started to get used to the environment and began pushing the edges
of customization to suite my purposes: I started adding customizations around
how I interact with the filesystem, and began adding more and more utility
scripts to make my work system behave the way I needed it to accomplish the
work I had to complete.
Personally, I enjoy working inside of Linux environments. They are more
reliable, cheaper to maintain and I work with them often both at home and at
work, so they are very familiar to me. However, with my hobbies I need a robust
UI environment that is consumer-friendly - one that responds quickly, has a
multitude of features, and a large application library, both commercial and
open-source. In my personal time, I develop applications for \*nix-based
platforms (Linux, Android) in JVM-based languages (Java, Kotlin). I also do
photography, using Photoshop to edit and compose my photos. And recently I have
added flying drones to my set of personal hobbies (with a DJI Phantom 3 & other
smaller drones, both for stunts and indoor flying). In all, my needs vary quite
a bit, but a common theme exists in all cases: I need a fast system with quick
access to various things, both through a UI and through the command line.
Recently, I've also recently wanted an environment that is consistent with the
environments I work with, both at work and at home, allowing me to "write-once-
run-everywhere". Over the last few years I've been working a lot with
[Docker containers](https://docker.io) and have even started to use them with
my own home server, allowing me to develop custom services locally and spin
them up on my home server for "production" use, or even use services
"off-the-shelf", and with the recent releases for Docker on Windows or Mac,
working with containers locally is now even easier than ever before.
