---
layout: post
title: "2025 End Of Year Post"
date: 2025-12-31 23:15:00 -0800
comments: false
categories:
  - updates
  - thoughts
---

On this day every year I usually sit down to reflect on the events and achievements of the year, but since 2017 I've not published those thoughts,
mostly because I usually spend the last day of the year with my family. But this year I decided to try to resume my end-of-year posts here, but as a
quick rundown instead. In short, while this year was full of signficant events, overall I've felt that things were pretty stagnant personally and
professionally.

## 2025 Rundown

### March
- [Blog theme update]({% post_url 2025-03-22-new-coat-of-paint %})

### April
- [My post]({% post_url 2025-03-31-social-verification %}) on a 2FA technique for verifying people in the world of AI.

### July
- Finally reached [Platinum level in ranked Apex Legends](https://mastodon.social/@seantpayne/114932572354924923) solo.

### August
- Finally [paid off](https://mastodon.social/@seantpayne/115093475692868623) [my Tesla Model 3]({% post_url 2019-09-02-pheobe-wallpaper %})
- Ashley had her major double-jaw joint replacement surgery, hopefully marking the beginning of the end for a decade long battle in which she has been
  suffering with pain once-and-for-all.
  
### September
- Took some time off to help Ashley as she recovered from her major surgery.
- Both Ashley and I watched [the end of Dandadan Season 2](https://mastodon.social/@seantpayne/115229349121653943) and thought it was absolutely
  amazing.
  
### November
- Changes at work saw a major sweeping shift away from SAFe, forming smaller teams to allow us all to be more agile. With this change, I became a
  Team Lead for the product lane that I have been working with. I have some hope that my team will be able to be more agile with this change, but I'm
  a little upset that they made the change just before Thanksgiving, leading to a lot of confusion.
- In keeping with my Apex Legends acheivements, [I finally got my 20-kill badge in Wildcard](https://mastodon.social/@seantpayne/115600838044670822).
- [Launched]({% post_url 2025-11-27-isthisbugfixed-live %}) [isthisbugfixed.com](https://isthisbugfixed.com)

---

## Social Media

### Mastodon
I've been a member of Mastodon for a long time, but I had been using Twitter more at the time and did not use it much. But since Twitter began to
make a number of changes (even before it was acquired), and because it started to devolve into chaos, I have been using Mastodon much more, especially
in the past year. However, this past year saw a lot more reposts/boosts on [my Mastodon](https://mastodon.social/@seantpayne) instead of original
content. I'm hoping to change that behavior in 2026.

### Instagram
I've been a user of Instagram for a while, but in late September I decided to finally walk away from the platform. I found that I was doomscrolling
more and more, and the platform did not help my mental state. Also, with hostile changes at Meta with regard to content ownership, AI use, and
[privacy intrusions](https://localmess.github.io/), I felt that it was better to not give the platform any more of myself. Given that, I decided that
the best thing for me would be to put it away for a while (if not indefinitely). While I did not close my account, I decided to 
[archive the Instagram app on my phone](https://support.google.com/android/answer/15523443?hl=en).

### Blog
This year has seen a number of changes to my blog, and I hope that I will be able to continue to improve things here over the course of the next year.
I have plans to bring back commenting, but in a way that reduces reliance on external vendors while still maintaining the ability to host this blog
using Jekyll.
In terms of content, I want to try to spend more time writing out some things I've learned at work and other thoughts in more long-form, especially
since I would like to start learning new programming languages again.

---

In conclusion, while there is a fair amount here, things were pretty stagnant for me personally in 2025. I do look forward to 2026 where there are a
number of signficant events planned, so we'll see how things go.
